MEN-3186: Write the Overview/Mender-Artifact section (#975)
mendersoftware/mender-docs: 02.Overview/06.Mender-Artifact/docs.md

    label: reference
---

As described in the [overview](../overview) Mender uses the output from a build
system and deploys this to remote devices.

In order to ensure a robust update process, Mender needs *additional metadata*

> alongside the raw bits of the file system. Depending on the version of the

Reviewer: Idea:
I think this is now referred to as a payload in our taxonomy. Maybe we should introduce the naming here?

Reviewer 2: I agree.  Also, this is pretty specific to full-image updates. Do we want to make it more generic?

Author: Thanks. I am reworking this and other parts with explicit mentions to file system updates.

Artifact used, the metadata might be different, but must contain:

* *Name* of the software build, so that software is not redeployed if it is

>   already installed at the device.

Reviewer: Nitpick:
```suggestion
on the device
```

* Device types the software is *compatible* with, so that software is not
  deployed to incompatible hardware (e.g. CPU architecture, hardware floating
  point support, peripheral drivers).
* *Checksum* of the root file system, so that software is not run if it gets
  corrupted during transit or storage.

> Furthermore, as Mender adds support for new use cases and platforms, the

Reviewer: Initial impression:
Is this really necessary? I guess if we do add more requirements, the docs should be updated right?

Author: Removing

deployment process may require more metadata in the future.

## The Mender Artifact file format

To handle the requirements mentioned above, Mender defines and uses a specific
file format, identified by its `.mender` suffix. A file in this format is
referred to as a **Mender Artifact**, or simply *an Artifact*. All relevant
components of Mender, such as the client and server, understand and use (only)
this specific file format when working with software deployments.

Internally, a Mender Artifact is simply a file archive in the [tarball
format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tar_(computing)?target=_blank). It
contains several files for incorporating versioning, extensions and metadata, as

> well as the main file: the root file system.

Reviewer: Thought:
Should we mention this as payload, instead of just a root file system? Since our new format can have other more generic forms of payloads?

Author: Modified to use payload term.

We have specification for multiple payloads but we only have implemented support for one payload, right?

Reviewer: Yes :)

The diagram below shows an example of the main attributes and structure of a
Mender Artifact file. Please note that the exact format of the artifact may vary
between versions.

![Mender Artifact format](mender-artifact-format.png)

<!--AUTOVERSION: "mender-artifact/blob/%"/mender-artifact-->
See the [Mender Artifact file
documentation](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-artifact/blob/master/Documentation?target=_blank)
to find more details about the exact format of the Mender Artifact.

## Versions

Mender is constantly evolving to adapt to the needs of its users. New versions
of the Mender Artifact format may be introduced as new features are added, if
the features require it. See the [compatibility documentation](../compatibility)
for an overview of the compatibility between Mender client and Mender Artifact
format versions.

> ## Streaming, resume and compression

Reviewer: Initial impression:
The heading reads a little weird to me.
Maybe split this into sub-headers for the paragraphs relating to each word?
Also, maybe resume should be changed to something like:
Download interrupted
or something along those lines?

> The tar format supports streaming, which Mender takes advantage of. As a Mender

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mender takes advantage of the tar format's support for streaming.
```

Artifact is downloaded from the Mender server or external storage, the Mender
client streams the root file system within it directly to the inactive
partition, without needing any temporary storage for unpacking it before it is
written. This drastically reduces storage requirements for the update process,
improves performance and reduces flash wear.

In cases where Artifact downloads are interrupted, e.g. due to unreliable
wireless network connectivity, Mender will resume the download from where it was
interrupted, using [HTTP range
requests](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7233?target=_blank).

To enable streaming and control based on metadata, like aborting the download if
the Artifact is not compatible with the device, the Mender Artifact itself is
not compressed. Instead, the root file systems within Artifacts are compressed,
currently with the [gzip compression
algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/gzip?target=_blank) by default.

> ## Signing and verification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signature verification
```

Author: Very good catch, there is nothing about "how to sign" here :+1:

To verify that the Artifact comes from a known source, the Mender Artifact
format supports image signing and verification. To create a signed Artifact,

> which Mender Client will verify during the update process, please follow the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which the Mender Client
```

instructions at [Signing and verifying Mender
Artifact](../../artifact-creation/sign-and-verify).

## State scripts

> Starting with the Mender client version 1.2, support for state scripts is

Reviewer: Thought:
Since this version is no longer supported, do we need to mention it?
All our clients support state scripts.

Author: I agree: totally irrelevant

Author: I wrote the following:

"Mender client supports extending and customizing the installation process using
state scripts functionality."

included. The most common use case is to do application data migration, for
example if an SQLite database stores application data like a user profile and a
new column needs to be added before starting the new version of the application.
A wide variety of other use cases are covered by state scripts. For more use
cases more information on how to use state scripts see [Mender state

> scripts](../../artifacts/state-scripts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
../../overview/state-scripts
```

## Working with Mender Artifacts

> The easiest and most common way to generate Mender Artifacts is by adding the

Reviewer 2: I think this should be more generic as well to encompass other use cases.

Author: Okey. I rewrote and extended this part to mention system updates for yocto, system updates for Debian family, and application updates.

Please review this part in detail.
